# Governance Lifecycle

> Include function-level documentation for developer integrations and technical specs; docs must be generated into /docs/governance/* for auditors, investors, regulators, and consumers.

## Proposal Intake

Community members draft proposals off-chain using the published template, then
submit them through the governance module with a deterministic payload hash and
parameter change set. The intake endpoint records the author address, the
referenced POTSO snapshot epoch, and embeds the payload hash into the
`gov.proposed` event. Intake rejects submissions that omit mandatory disclosures
or reference an epoch newer than `E-1`, ensuring all voters share the same
eligibility dataset.

## Deposit Escrow Collection

Each proposal must attach the configured `MinProposalDeposit`. Deposits are held
in module escrow until the proposal concludes. Passing or vetoed proposals return
the deposit to the proposer; proposals that fail quorum or are abandoned forfeit
a portion to the community treasury to offset review costs. Deposits exist solely
to deter spamâ€” they are not interest-bearing instruments and confer no financial
rights.

## Voting Period

Proposals enter the voting period as soon as the minimum deposit clears and
remain open until the `VotingEnd` timestamp recorded on-chain. Validators and
delegators may submit a single ballot per address selecting **yes**, **no**, or
**abstain**. Subsequent submissions overwrite the prior choice so wallets can
surface a "change vote" workflow without additional signing steps.

Ballot weight is derived from the POTSO composite engagement leaderboard to
ensure aligned incentives across staking and usage. Each vote pulls the
participant's basis-point share from the snapshot finalised at POTSO epoch
`E-1` (the most recently processed epoch) so that last-minute stake churn cannot
artificially inflate voting power. Addresses without weight in that snapshot
are rejected, preventing zero-power spam while still allowing abstentions from
eligible voters.

## Timelock Enforcement

Once a proposal finalises with a passing outcome, the proposer (or any keeper)
must queue it for execution. Queuing records `execute_after = finalized_at +
TimelockDuration`. The runtime refuses to execute the payload before the
timestamp elapses and emits `gov.queued` for monitoring systems. During the
timelock window, stakeholders can review the payload hash, compare it against the
original proposal, and raise alerts if downstream integrations require manual
intervention.

## Execution and Archival

After the timelock expires, any address may call `ExecuteProposal`. The runtime
verifies the payload hash, applies the parameter changes atomically, and emits
`gov.executed`. Completed proposals are archived with their final state, vote
summary, and execution transaction hash so auditors can reconstruct the full
timeline. Historical records remain queryable indefinitely, providing an
immutable audit trail for regulators, investors, and the community.
